---
ID: 4475
post_title: A Better WordPress Singleton
author: James DiGioia
post_date: 2015-08-04 07:42:50
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: http://jamesdigioia.com/?p=4475
published: false
---
If you look at any WordPress plugin of significant size, you'll probably find most of them boot the same way. From [BuddyPress][1], to [PressForward][2], to [JetPack][3], all of these boot the same way: with singletons. JetPack in particular is interesting, as many of its modules are [also][4] [singletons][5] [themselves][6]. It's an extremely common pattern in WordPress plugin development, wrapping the main plugin class in a singleton and instantiating it through a static method, which then enforces only a single instance of the class exists and *can ever exist*. The prototypical example looks like this in PHP:

    class PluginClass {
        public static $instance = null;
        public static function init() {
            if ( null === self::$instance ) {
                self::$instance = new PluginClass();
                self::$instance->boot();
            }
            return self::$instance;
        }
    
        protected function __construct() {
            // Startup
        }
    
        protected function boot() {
            // Boot
        }
    }
    

The `protected` constructor means that only the class can instantiate itself, so no other code can create a new instance of the class, and the single instance can be retrieved by calling `PluginClass::init()` again. The second time, the instance already exists statically and is returned directly.

Singletons are generally an [anti-pattern][7], or are least overused to the point where the benefits of enforcing a single class instance outweigh the drawbacks. The biggest issue is if you ever find yourself needing two instances of the object, you're screwed. It'll take a ton of refactoring to undo all the locations in which the singleton static method is called.

They're generally much worse in other languages, like Java, where the application is long-running and there is a shared memory space. The drawbacks often encountered in those languages are not encountered in PHP, with its single-thread, fire-and-die approach.

Even though I'm a big fan of WordPress generally, it's full of anti-patterns (omg globals everywhere!), so I'm not really that bothered by the idea of plugin developers adding another one onto the heap, and in this case, it generally solves a lot more problems than it causes. However, the singleton pattern does still have an issue in WordPress:

*You've completely locked yourself off from your constructor.*

This generally isn't a huge issue in WordPress plugins, as most plugins don't do any kind of unit testing, but if you're interested in doing unit testing and your main plugin class has dependencies, being unable to access your constructor means you're unable to mock any of those dependencies, or pass in anything at all.

I've spent a little bit of time playing around with Laravel, Pimple, and some of the other dependency injection containers out in the wider PHP world, because I wanted to more effectively unit test my plugins, and in addition to the singleton pattern, many of those main singleton classes also function effectively as containers as well. [PressForward][8] sets up all its dependencies there and uses them throughout the application, so I wanted to build something that fits with the pattern many WordPress plugin developers are already familiar with. That means the main application class should be a singleton.

Instead of through static methods, this can also be accomplished in the class's constructor:

    class PluginClass {
        protected static $instance = null;
        public function __construct($file) {
            if (static::$instance !== null) {
                throw new Exception;
            }
    
            static::$instance = $this;
        }
        public static function get() {
            return static::$instance;
        }
    }
    
    $pluginClass = new PluginClass(__FILE__);
    $pluginClass->boot();
    

Now, if an instance already exists, an Exception is thrown, so another developer would not be able to instantiate a new instance of the main plugin class. The constructor is now exposed, so any dependencies, even if it's just the boot file location, can be passed into the main class, and the class's singleton'ness is still maintained.

There is one minor issue with the code above, though: A new global variable is created. The `$pluginClass` variable is global, and while we don't really care if it gets clobbered by another developer, if another developer is expecting that variable to not exist and it does, it could mess up their code. So there's one more trick I'd like to share:

    call_user_func( array( new PluginClass( __FILE__ ), 'boot' ) );
    

This was pulled from a suggestion in a pull request on the [WordPress Plugin Boilerplate][9].

 [1]: https://github.com/buddypress/BuddyPress/blob/master/src/bp-loader.php#L134-L153
 [2]: https://github.com/PressForward/pressforward/blob/master/pressforward.php#L54-L62
 [3]: https://github.com/Automattic/jetpack/blob/master/class.jetpack.php#L291-L307
 [4]: https://github.com/Automattic/jetpack/blob/master/modules/markdown/easy-markdown.php#L54-L58
 [5]: https://github.com/Automattic/jetpack/blob/master/class.jetpack-admin.php#L17-L22
 [6]: https://github.com/Automattic/jetpack/blob/master/modules/custom-post-types/portfolios.php#L21-L29
 [7]: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/12755539/why-is-singleton-considered-an-anti-pattern
 [8]: https://github.com/PressForward/pressforward/blob/master/pressforward.php#L77-L91
 [9]: https://github.com/DevinVinson/WordPress-Plugin-Boilerplate/pull/321