---
ID: 4241
post_title: The Myth Of AI | Edge.org
author: James DiGioia
post_date: 2015-03-07 22:52:46
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: http://jamesdigioia.com/?p=4241
published: false
---
This is all of a sudden a pretty big deal. If you talk to translators, they're facing a predicament, which is very similar to some of the other early victim populations, due to the particular way we digitize things. It's similar to what's happened with recording musicians, or investigative journalists—which is the one that bothers me the most—or photographers. What they're seeing is a severe decline in how much they're paid, what opportunities they have, their long-term prospects. They're seeing certain opportunities for continuing, particularly in real-time translation… but I should point out that's going away soon too. We're going to have real-time translation on Skype soon.

The thing is, they're still needed. There's an impulse, a correct impulse, to be skeptical when somebody bemoans what's been lost because of new technology. For the usual thought experiments that come up, a common point of reference is the buggy whip: You might say, "Well, you wouldn't want to preserve the buggy whip industry."

But translators are not buggy whips, because they're still needed for the big data scheme to work. They're the opposite of a buggy whip. What's happened here is that translators haven't been made obsolete. What's happened instead is that the structure through which we receive the efforts of real people in order to make translations happen has been optimized, but those people are still needed.

via [The Myth Of AI | Edge.org][1].

 [1]: http://edge.org/conversation/the-myth-of-ai