---
ID: 4475
post_title: A Better WordPress Singleton
author: James DiGioia
post_date: 2015-08-03 22:57:56
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: http://jamesdigioia.com/?p=4475
published: false
---
If you look at any WordPress plugin of significant size, you'll probably find most of them boot the same way. From [BuddyPress][1], to [PressForward][2], to [JetPack][3], all of these boot the same way: with singletons. JetPack in particular is interesting, as many of its modules are [also][4] [singletons][5] [themselves][6]. It's an extremely common pattern in WordPress plugin development, wrapping the main plugin class in a singleton and instantiating it through a static method, which then enforces only a single instance of the class exists and *can ever exist*. The prototypical example looks thusly:

    class PluginClass {
        public static $instance = null;
        public static function init() {
            if ( null === self::$instance ) {
                self::$instance = new PluginClass();
                self::$instance->boot();
            }
            return self::$instance;
        }
    
        protected function __construct() {
            // Startup
        }
    }
    

The `protected` constructor means that only the class can instantiate itself, so no other code can create a new instance of the class, and the single instance can be retrieved by calling `PluginClass::init()` again. The second time, the instance already exists statically and is returned directly.

Singletons are generally an [anti-pattern][7], or are least overused to the point where the benefits of enforcing a single class instance outweigh the drawbacks. The biggest issue is if you ever find yourself needing two instances of the object, you're screwed. It'll take a ton of refactoring to undo all the locations in which the singleton static method is called.

They're generally much worse in other languages, like Java, where the application is long-running and there is a shared memory space. The drawbacks often encountered in those languages are not encountered in PHP, with its single-thread, fire-and-die approach.

Even though I'm a big fan of WordPress generally, it's full of anti-patterns (omg globals everywhere!), so I'm not really that bothered by the idea of plugin developers adding another one onto the heap, and in this case, it generally solves a lot more problems than it causes. However, the singleton pattern does still have an issue in WordPress:

*You've completely locked yourself off from your constructor.*

This generally isn't a huge issue in WordPress plugins, as most plugins don't do any kind of unit testing.

 [1]: https://github.com/buddypress/BuddyPress/blob/master/src/bp-loader.php#L134-L153
 [2]: https://github.com/PressForward/pressforward/blob/master/pressforward.php#L54-L62
 [3]: https://github.com/Automattic/jetpack/blob/master/class.jetpack.php#L291-L307
 [4]: https://github.com/Automattic/jetpack/blob/master/modules/markdown/easy-markdown.php#L54-L58
 [5]: https://github.com/Automattic/jetpack/blob/master/class.jetpack-admin.php#L17-L22
 [6]: https://github.com/Automattic/jetpack/blob/master/modules/custom-post-types/portfolios.php#L21-L29
 [7]: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/12755539/why-is-singleton-considered-an-anti-pattern