---
ID: 3647
post_title: >
  You are totally unreliable Twitter –
  The New Inquiry
author: James DiGioia
post_date: 2015-02-04 08:59:13
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: http://jamesdigioia.com/?p=3647
published: false
---
But this is also why I’ve mostly given up on twitter as a place where it is possible to have meaningful, heated arguments with strangers. I think it’s possible to talk to strangers when you’re not having an argument, or to argue when the person you’re talking to is not really a stranger. But if you don’t know and respect the person you’re talking to (and to some extent, understand where they’re coming from, and want to), and especially if you build up a head of aggressive steam as you set out to crush their arguments, both of you are likely to come away from the exchange pleased and unsatisfied. After pleasantly proving to yourself that you are correct, you will be unsatisfied by the failure of your new mortal enemy to admit it. I describe this experience as a person who has experienced it many times, and who is so very tired of it. But it’s left me thinking that “changing minds” is something that twitter is all but engineered to do poorly. If you think it can be done, more power to you; I hope you are right. For me, it seems like a machine designed for creating mutual enraged incomprehension, an alchemy by which anger plus misunderstanding creates the self-righteous confirmation that I am right and everyone else is wrong. The friction between these divergent confirmations can burn extremely hot.

via [You are totally unreliable Twitter – The New Inquiry][1].

 [1]: http://thenewinquiry.com/blogs/zunguzungu/you-are-totally-unreliable-twitter/